# -*- org-export-babel-evaluate: nil -*-
#+PROPERTY: header-args :eval never-export
#+PROPERTY: header-args:python :session cat 1.1
#+PROPERTY: header-args:ipython :session cat 1.1
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/home/yiddi/git_repos/YIDDI_org_export_theme/theme/org-nav-theme_cache.css" >
#+HTML_HEAD: <script src="/home/yiddi/git_repos/YIDDI_org_export_theme/theme/org-nav-theme.js"></script>
#+HTML_HEAD: <script type="text/javascript">
#+HTML_HEAD: <script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>
#+OPTIONS: html-link-use-abs-url:nil html-postamble:nil html-preamble:t
#+OPTIONS: H:3 num:nil ^:nil _:nil tags:not-in-toc
#+TITLE: 群论笔记 九
#+AUTHOR: yiddishkop
#+EMAIL: [[mailto:yiddishkop@163.com][yiddi's email]]
#+TAGS: {PKGIMPT(i) DATAVIEW(v) DATAPREP(p) GRAPHBUILD(b) GRAPHCOMPT(c)} LINAGAPI(a) PROBAPI(b) MATHFORM(f) MLALGO(m)

* Cat 9.1 Natural transformations
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: cat-9.1-natural-transformations
  :END:

3 most important things in category: 1. definition of category 2.
definition of functor 3. definition of natrual transformation

the most most important is (3), (1)(2) is just nessary background
knowledge.

category - structure functor - preserve the structure, model a cat in
another cat.

compare diff image given by the functors.

natural trans are mappings between functors, --- alse preserve the
structure.

take into these 2 functor's structure and presever.

--------------

so ,what is mapping between functors( remember that, functor is a type
constructor with fmap inside )

1. for objects in Cat C

   #+CAPTION: mapping between 2 functors
   [[https://s7.postimg.cc/7254suit7/screenshot_50.png]]

   for other object in C I do the same thing. I find the images of this
   object and pick a morphism between them.

   then I create a whole family of morphisms, these *individual
   morphism* is called the *component of the natural transformation*,
   --- component of /alpha at object of a, notice that object a is in
   the Cat C, but component /alpha is in Cat D.

   #+CAPTION: component of natrual trans
   [[https://s7.postimg.cc/7gb25xzxn/screenshot_51.png]]

2. for morphism in Cat C

is there some relation between the Ff and Gf?

[notice] natrual trans is not have to exist between any functors.

we are now pay more attention to the 2 kinds of morphism in Cat D: * the
component of NT(relation between two type constructor of same object in
C) - in picture below, */alpha\_a : Fa->Ga and /alpha\_b : Fb->Gb* * the
mophism of original Cat and its mapping in target Cat - in picture
below, *Ff and Gf*

#+CAPTION: the 'beautiful' Rectangle
[[https://s31.postimg.cc/gje2ob36z/screenshot_52.png]]

Natural transformation describe a mapping between 2 functors, means
these two functors are somehow similar, somehow related.So there must be
some relations between these 4(2 components and 2 morphism mappings) ---
*THEY ARE COMPOSABLE*

=α_b * Ff = Gf * α_a=

is called *Naturality conditoin*, and this rectangle is called
*Naturality Square*.

*α\_b and α\_a is called Natural Transformation*

** How Strong is the naturality is ?
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: how-strong-is-the-naturality-is
   :END:

that's depends very much on the structure of the category.In some
categories there are *lots of morphisms* between objects like set ---
morphism rich category.

If we draw these 4 ojbects( set, type constructor ): Fa, Fb, Ga, Gb

#+CAPTION: 4 type costructors
[[https://s31.postimg.cc/v553cfpnv/screenshot_53.png]]

** Natural trans vs. commutative graph
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: natural-trans-vs.commutative-graph
   :END:

In mathematics, we often say that: from Cat C, we can find the object a
can be mapping to a morphism of Cat D; and similarly, morphism of Cat C
can be mapping to a *Naturality Squre* in Cat D.

*natural* *transformation* can be something like higher-level thant the
*commutative graph*. So you just can say "there is a Natural trans
between 2 functors", then this means that "there are some *commutative
graphs*,these *Naturality squares*"

and we will have a second semaster lectures, introducing "limit,
colimit" --- defined on the basis of Natural trans, of course they also
can be defined by the commutative graphs. But Natural Trans is a
higher-level 'language' to describe. And we can find that product and
coproduct are just special cases of limit and colimit.

components of a Natural Trans are morphisms, and you know that morphisms
are functions, function can shrunk information --- can lose information.
If you map one functor into another functor using a natural trans, there
maybe lot of information will lost.

#+CAPTION: Natural Trans will shrink information
[[https://s31.postimg.cc/sdqezqgkr/screenshot_54.png]]

*Natural Trans acts like sampling from a high resolutin picture, and get
a low resolution picture.*

** Natural Transformation can invertibel
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: natural-transformation-can-invertibel
   :END:

seriously :| then you find that: you have some *mapping*, and you have a
*invertible mapping*:

- function and *invertible* function will lead to a definition of
  *isomorphism*, and a *isomorphic* *objects*.

- Natural Trans and *invertible* Natural Trans must will lead to
  *something* --- *isomorphic functors*.

so *natural transfomation*, is also *natural isomorphism*.

Natural transformation is just a bunch of morphisms, that means there
will be bunch of isomorphism.

Move further, means that all of components are invertible morphism,
means every component is isomorphism.

Natural isomorphism are really important.

#+CAPTION: Natural isomorphism
[[https://s31.postimg.cc/3n0qm8tln/screenshot_55.png]]

** Natural Trans in programming
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: natural-trans-in-programming
   :END:

Functor is mapping between categories, and in Haskell it's endofunctor
mapping from ONE category to itself.

Natural transformation is a family of morphisms between two
endofunctors.

Family of morphisms, morphism is functin, family of functions that
parameterize by a type --- which is called polymorphic function.

seriously :|

So,

*naturally transformation is a polymorphic function*

#+BEGIN_SRC haskell
    alpha:: forall a. Fa -> Ga
#+END_SRC

Notice the difference between *polymorphic function* and *ad-hoc
polymorphism*. * polymorphic function : apply one function for all type.
* ad-hoc polymorphism : (overriding) can apply different function for
different type.

Why I emphasize "apply one function for all types."?

#+CAPTION: Natural Transform illustration
[[https://s31.postimg.cc/fsuj9x7uj/screenshot_56.png]]

=fmap :: (a->b) -> (Fa->Fb)=

=alpha:: forall a. Fa -> Ga=

=α_b * Ff = Gf * α_a=

=α_b * fmap_F f = fmap_G f α_a= is the interpretation of the *Naturality
Condition*.

Fb->Gb * Fa->Fb = Ga->Gb * Fa->Ga

but α can be applied for all types

or we can say: 1. because of *parametric polyphism*, Fa->Fb; Ga->Gb; -
like some scala codes =List[Int].map() = List[Double]= or
=Option[String].map() = Option[Int]= - every kind of =type constructor=
will have its =own implementation= of =fmap= 2. because of *polymorphic
function*, Fb->Gb; Fa->Ga - for all type a

#+BEGIN_SRC haskell
    alpha:: forall a. Fa -> Ga
    alpha * fmap f = fmap f * alpha 
#+END_SRC

by the TWO KINDS OF POLYMORPHISM, the *naturality condition* is
automatically satisfied

** example
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: example
   :END:

define a safeHead

#+BEGIN_SRC haskell
    safeHead :: [a]->Maybe a //this is a F[a]->G[a] a NaturalTransformation
    safeHead [] = Nothing
    safeHead (x:xs) = Just x
#+END_SRC

and it'll automatically find the *different implemention* of =fmap= by
*different invocator*, this scenario =List= and =Maybe=. So the whole
naturality condition will automatically satisfied.

#+CAPTION: naturally condition
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/orajf3za7/screenshot_57.png]]

** How Natural Transformation save lots of computing time
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: how-natural-transformation-save-lots-of-computing-time
   :END:

This will give you a intuition that category theory can be used in
programming in a very practical way. You see that from picture above,
apply =fmap= to a =List= is very *expensive*. But if compiler knows
natural transformation, then convert =fmap= of =List=, to =fmap= of a
=Maybe=, this will *save a lot of computing resource*

** Intuition of functor
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: intuition-of-functor
   :END:

So we know that why call a functor a container, because fmap apply to a
container will *ONLY* *modify* *content* inside of the container, it
will *NEVER* *change* the *shape* of container.

** Intuition of natural transformation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: intuition-of-natural-transformation
   :END:

On the opposite side, the natural trans *NEVER* *modify* the *contents*
of the container, what it *ONLY* dose is *change* the *shape* of the
container, repackages the container.

=fmap :: (a->b) -> (Fa->Fb)=

=alpha:: forall a. Fa -> Ga=

** The ubiquitous of natural transformation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: the-ubiquitous-of-natural-transformation
   :END:

we use polymorphic function a lot, is it a natural transformation?

** =fn:: a->[a]=
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: fn-a-a
   :END:

function from =a= to =List[a]=, yes it's a natural transformation:

- type a to type a: is just a *identity functor on a*

so =fn:: a->[a]= is truely a natural transformation

** =fn:: [a]->Int=
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: fn-a-int
   :END:

Like computing the length of a List, it's also a natural transformation,
because the =a= is *constant functor*, it will ignore its type argument.

So, in general if you have a polymorphic function from an =ADT= to
another =ADT=, it's a *natural transformation*.

because ADT as showed before, are functors.

* Cat 9.2 bicategories
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: cat-9.2-bicategories
  :END:

Giving you a large large view of category, as far as professor can do.
Diving into deep math.

when you think about mapping, you should ask several questions:

** Natural transformation composition
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: natural-transformation-composition
   :END:

#+CAPTION: multi-natural transformation
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/n1ehao8hb/screenshot_59.png]]

before that we must check the Naturality condition:

=Hf * (β * α_a) ?= (β * α_b) * Ff=

Diagram chasing, you must make sure all the Naturality condition
satisfied.

** Identity
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: identity
   :END:

#+CAPTION: Identity natural transformation
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/gnpe7e10f/screenshot_58.png]]

** Composition
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: composition
   :END:

of course, NT is bunch of morphism, morphism of course is composable, so
dose the NT.

But, hold on, what are we talking about? Mappings of Functors, and
Functor is mapping of 2 category.

*when refer to a mapping of some thing, you must ask yourself, can I
take this "something" back to the basic concept of "object" of
category.*

In this scenario, yes we can:

- NT -> morphism
- functor -> object
- ??? -> category

??? = [C, D]

#+CAPTION: [C,D] = D\^C
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/f8svfglkv/screenshot_60.png]]

So this scenario: * *NT* is morphism; * *functor* is object;

remeber "Category of Category" is a "*Cat*". remeber that, * *functor*
is the morphism of Cat. * *category* is the object of Cat.

** Cells and 2-category
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: cells-and-2-category
   :END:

#+CAPTION: cell
[[https://postimg.cc/image/xbly6vrrv/]]

2-category : has move further one step than "Cat"---category of
category, which is the pair category as object.

Hom-set of Cat is set of Functors; Cat often think as a Category of
small Category.

Hom-set are trully a *set*. And then set can be seen as a Category, then
we get [C,D] --- 2-category.

but wait a minite, in the Category of Category, we have 2 objects: C and
D, then [C,D] must also be in the same category with C and D. So:

#+CAPTION: [C,D] in same Cat with C and D
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/9xdyv54rj/screenshot_62.png]]

something like the set: * set = {a,b,c,d} * a ∈ set * c ∈ set * {a,c} ∈
set

** Exponential ?
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: exponential
   :END:

#+CAPTION: [C,D]
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/w0e6yge6n/screenshot_64.png]]

but functor of category, is a exponential ADT,

?????? why [C,D] = D\^C

#+CAPTION: why [C,D] = D\^C
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/mmv8b8bpr/screenshot_71.png]]

by the partial function, we can see some glue of [C,D] = D\^C, this
should be marked as TODO, I ignore the details of this, when this taught
at previous lectures, need reviewing.

categorical products as pairs of elements and categorical products with
universal construction and projections, they will give you the same
result.

the category of functor category[C,D] is same as the D\^C, we start with
a product category CXD,and then do the universal construction and we get
the exponential objects.

Can we build something instead hom-sets of hom-objects

*vertical composition*

#+CAPTION: vetical composition
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/8xs9ctcb3/screenshot_65.png]]

Is there the natural trans between G * F and G'*F'

#+CAPTION: G/F and G'/F'
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/xr1tdrsu7/screenshot_66.png]]

and the answer is "Yes"

#+CAPTION: Natural trans between G/F and G'/F'
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/thx3bmkfz/screenshot_67.png]]

and it's called =β * α=.

** Interchange law
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: interchange-law
   :END:

horizon composition and vertical compoisition

#+CAPTION: composition of vertical and relation with horizon composition
[[https://s17.postimg.cc/sto8sd127/screenshot_68.png]]

skipped, too long to draw

but definition of 2-category involves both vertical composition and
horizon composition of two cells ,and the interchanging law.

we can get isomorphism from the vertical composition ??? They are called
left and right unitor.

** 2-category vs. bicategory
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: category-vs.bicategory
   :END:

So, if we start defining the stuff up to isomorphsim, then suddenly from
a *2-category* we are getting into something called *bicategory*.

the diff between 2-category and bicategory: * in a bicategory
categorical laws are *up to isomorphism*. * 2-category is *more strict*
than bicategory, becasue categorical laws is *equale* * bicategory is
relaxed version of 2-category.

** coherence law
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: coherence-law
   :END:

can not understand, so skipped!!

Lets just talk about bicategory

what if we have a category in which all morphism are inverted.If
morphism in a category are all inverted, this category is called
*groupoid*.

So if you start doing the same thing with groupoid,instead of
categories, turn out that you can have like n-groupoids and coherence
laws are simple for groupoids.

so the groupoid people say to catgory people,you're wrong direction. The
correct thing to do is work with groupoid, and in particular if you go
with high enough, you know at some point you say well, what's wrong with
infinity. infinity groupoid.

infinity groupoid would be something has zero cells -- objects . one
cells morphism between them, two cells morphism between morphims, three
cells between morphisms of morphisms and ... so on to inifinity.

It turns out this is exactly the structure of the famous homotopy type
theory.

homotopy type theory said that groupoid are the way to go, not
categories.
